---
layout: post
title: Goodbye Netflix, Children, Hiroshima, Mon Amour, etc.
---

We bought our biennial subscription to cable (hello Time Warner, fuck you I hate
you) at the <a href="http://www.cumberlandfair.com/">Cumberland County Fair</a>.
Who doesn't buy their cable at the fair? This year it was $39.95 for a year of
digital cable. Not as good as the $29.99 I got for basic cable two years ago,
but better nonetheless than the $57.95 that they normally charge for garbage
television. It's a racket, we know it, paying anything for commercial
television. But it's better than ritualistic suicide or violent hard drinking,
both things that come to mind on dark, raw February nights. So, we indulge
ourselves as winter comes.

<!--more-->

<a href="http://www.netflix.com/Movie/Umberto_D./60029428">"Bankrupt and lonely,
an old man (Carlo Battisti) considers committing suicide."</a>

The sad part about signing up is saying goodbye to Netflix, which I've "traded"
in for cable. Netflix is like an old friend that indulges my every impulse,
almost always to the point of demonstrating why I should not have such impulses
in the first place.

<a href="http://www.netflix.com/Movie/Ikiru/60033661">"After finding out he's
terminally ill with cancer, a government official (Takashi Shimura) quits his
job and prepares to face his last year alive, devoid of family or friends.
Determined not to die alone, he heads to a bar to get drunk for the first
time."</a>

Allured by the two sentence existential synopses, as thin and absurd as they are
true, I was driven deeper into the unwatchable by the recommendation engine. The
queue swelled and then grew stagnant as I held on to titles for weeks, dreading
having to actually watch these things that I dared not send back for fear of
missing out on something essential and life-changing.

<a href="http://www.netflix.com/Movie/Thomas_in_Love/60024351">"...the search
for love and meaning in cyberspace by an agoraphobe named Thomas Thomas (Benoit
Verhaert), who hasn't left his home in years. His mother (Micheline Hardy) and
everyone else talks to him via videophone, and his girlfriend, Clara, is
computer-generated. But into his world arrives a prostitute..."</a>

Some went back scarcely watched
(<a href="http://www.netflix.com/Movie/Alphaville/246062">"Intergalactic hero
Lemmy Caution is assigned to kill the inventor of a fascist computer."</a>), but
not too many. And almost all of them were better than the forgettable crap that
we'll distract ourselves with for he next few months.

<a href="http://www.netflix.com/Movie/Wild_Camp/70061884">"...an ex-convict
(Denis Lavant) takes a job as a sailing instructor at his brother-in-law's
summer camp, only to become entrenched in a lurid affair with a teen
camper..."</a>

Goodbye for now old love, I'll see you again in a year when I kick the tired old
whore back to the street.
