---
title: Lisboa
image: 2024-08-26-alcantara-view.jpg
---

I spent a week in Lisbon, Portugal on work.

<!--more-->

Each day started with this nice climb up the street behind my hotel for coffee.
{% picture "2024-08-26-climb-to-coffee.jpg", "Climb To Coffee" %}

The hotel Algiers in the park behing the cafe. {% picture
"2024-08-26-hotel-algiers.jpg", "Hotel Algiers" %}

Alley along the way back. {% picture "2024-08-26-alley.jpg", "Alley" %}

A coworker and I got settled in style with a rooftop setup. Lisbon is a city of
rooftop bars. {% picture "2024-08-26-rooftop-setup.jpg", "Rooftop Setup" %}

The team headed out to dinner. {% picture "2024-08-26-marquis-de-pombal.jpg",
"Marquis De Pombal" %}

{% picture "2024-08-26-eduardo-vii-park.jpg", "Eduardo VII Park" %}

We visited [LX Factory](https://lxfactory.com/en/lx-factory). A sort of outdoor
arts enclave filled with shops and restaurants. The map at the entrance paid
cheeky tribute to the precarious status of such a place amidst the development
boom happening all around: "Until debt tear us apart".

{% picture "2024-08-26-factory-x.jpg", "Factory X" %}

And sure enough, the view from a rooftop deck was a choreographed criss-cross of
cranes doing the dance of large scale contstruction. {% picture
"2024-08-26-rooftop-ccranes.jpg", "Rooftop Cranes" %}

{% picture "2024-08-26-creeper.jpg", "Creeper" %}

{% picture "2024-08-26-bookstore.jpg", "Bookstore" %}

{% picture "2024-08-26-factory-x-alley.jpg", "Factory X Alley" %}

We visited the Pena National Palace in Sintra...not ideal for someone who is
afraid of heights!

{% picture "2024-08-26-castle-courtyard.jpg", "Castle Courtyard" %}

{% picture "2024-08-26-castle.jpg", "Castle" %}

{% picture "2024-08-26-park-entrance.jpg", "Park Entrance" %}

Nearly every public park in Lisbon has a cafe or bar or restaurant in it. Many
with hilarious English/American names like "Banana Cafe" and "Hot Dog Lovers"

{% picture "2024-08-26-banana-cafe.jpg", "Banana Cafe" %}

I made it a goal for the trip to partake of one of these park bars. Mission
accomplished! {% picture "2024-08-26-park-drink.jpg", "Park Drink" %}

We took a tuk tuk tour of the city. {% picture "2024-08-26-tuk-tuk.jpg", "Tuk
Tuk" %}

{% picture "2024-08-26-fountain.jpg", "Fountain" %}

{% picture "2024-08-26-purple-car.jpg", "Purple Car" %}

Extravagant bathrooms were a theme in Lisbon.

{% picture "2024-08-26-extravagant-bathroom.jpg", "Extravagant Bathroom" %}

{% picture "2024-08-26-narrow-street.jpg", "Narrow Street" %}

{% picture "2024-08-26-square.jpg", "Square" %}

{% picture "2024-08-26-tram.jpg", "Tram" %}

{% picture "2024-08-26-church.jpg", "Church" %}

{% picture "2024-08-26-liberdad-water.jpg", "Liberdad Water" %}

{% picture "2024-08-26-hats.jpg", "Hats" %}

The TAP lounge at the Lison airport had a self-serve bar! {% picture
"2024-08-26-lisbon-airport-self-service-bar.jpg", "Lisbon Airport Self Service
Bar" %}

Logan, a real nexus of transportation by land, sea and air. {% picture
"2024-08-26-logan.jpg", "Logan" %}
